[Music]
the red fox
a species present in the uk for
thousands of years
known for their striking coats piercing
eyes
their famous bushy tail and the ability
to live side by side with us
humans they are a truly exceptional
species
found throughout the northern hemisphere
the red fox is known for its
adaptability and is now a species of our
urban environments just as much as the
rural countryside
but despite their intelligence and
versatile nature
these beautiful creatures sometimes need
our help
each spring fox cubs are born in den
scattered across the uk
but sadly many become orphans
red foxes are a species that face many
threats
and in the wild rarely live longer than
18 months
we caught up with jamie king's cop so
tell us a bit about the process from
when you get
orphan fox cubs in right up to them
being released back into the wild
so if foxes come in as orphans then
they're going to be with us for
quite a few months in the early days
when they're really quite young
and they're they're not opening their
eyes that they're not even orange yet
a lot of people don't necessarily
recognize them as a fox at that age
they get confused with kittens with
puppies with all sorts it's a case of
feeding them
every two hours moving on to every three
hours day and night then gradually
they move on to move through the milk
stage and onto solids and we wean them
and as soon as we can have them less
dependent on people we do
it's important that those foxes don't
become habituated to people and we'd
like to keep them wild
when fox cubs are born they are deaf
blind and completely reliant on their
mothers for everything
so without a mother their care falls
into the hands of the team
when cubs first come into the world they
have short black fur
which they will begin to molt around
four weeks old
this is a telltale sign of how young
orphans are when they come in
and some are tiny we want to get them
independent of people as quickly as we
can we want them to know that they're
foxes
so the sooner we can get them you know
not depending on being fed
regularly by us and they can eat for
themselves and be away from us that's
the best
the team at secret world wildlife rescue
invest
hours of time and care into
rehabilitating wildlife
and they understand the importance of
giving every single animal
the best chance of surviving in the wild
that's why they focus on soft releases
meaning the orphans will be placed in
pre-release pens for quite some time so
they can get a
feel for being in the wild so most of
the fox clubs
you know in that stage of their life
they tend to come in at sort of february
march time
and they'll be with us until late summer
early autumn and we'd then release them
when they would naturally disperse from
their nato territory
in the wild so late summer early autumn
august sort of time
we've had a look at some of the footage
from your pre-release
pens i mean they seem to give you a bit
of a run around don't they
they really do those pre-release pens
are really important that once those
foxes
have less of a dependency on us for
hands-on rearing
um they can go up there and live wild
and be wild and
you know develop those wild behaviors
amongst other young foxes
and when you rescue a fox are you able
to release it back to where it came from
or is
it a bit more complex than that it's
generally the the plan
if we can is to put them back where they
came from they'll have a territory
they know the area they need to get back
there and the longer they're with us the
more likely they are to lose that
territory
with orphans it's quite different they
don't have a territory and they don't
have much experience in the wild so we
do a soft release process
where i do need to find them a new
release site somewhere that i can see to
the best of my ability
is suitable and is safe from the various
different threats that foxes face
hand-read orphans would never have known
anything different than being
in a wildlife rescue center so this
stage is incredibly
important for them and allows them to
become
wild foxes under the watchful eye of the
care team
science has found that social hierarchy
is developed in fox cups very early on
and through play they develop vital
skills for hunting and communication
so it is important that they develop
these skills with one another
as soon as possible it's jamie's job to
catch and release the foxes when they
are ready to go
and they can certainly give him a bit of
a run around on release day
that early morning where we have to come
in to move those fox cubs to their
release site
um can be a real task when you've got to
chase up
four or five maybe six young foxes who
are going to give you the run around
they really really will they'll go up
the fence they'll jump around
but it's good it's reassuring like i
said you they need to be fast they need
to be agile to survive in the world to
be successful
and i always wish i could explain to
them don't worry you know we're going to
do something nice here i'm not trying to
hurt you
once i get you in this release when you
never have to see me again so it is
reassuring
but it can be a pain
this may seem a bit traumatic but this
is the exact behavior the team want to
see
as the foxes are acting exactly as they
should
in the wild it is a lot of pressure when
you consider the amount of work
and effort that goes into the rescue and
the rehabilitation of
all these different species we deal with
just over five thousand animals a year
and i've got trying as many of them as i
can back to the wild we always try and
monitor them post release to see how
they get on it's not really enough to
just release them and think brilliant
fine
and wash your hands of it it's important
to know that what we've done and the
whole process
has worked and that we've done right by
the foxes and they are going to
survive and thrive and hopefully breed
in the wild that can be difficult
because foxes can be quite elusive
and trying to keep track of them once
they're out there in the wild
can be tricky but we do our best sadly
not all foxes can be released over the
years secret world has rescued foxes
that have been cruelly kept as pets
unfortunately these animals would never
survive in the wild
as they have become so accustomed to
humans they would end up in some sort of
trouble
thankfully the team have taken on a few
foxes that could never be released back
into the wild
and they are now residents they are
looked after by the charity and now live
happily
in their huge enclosure and are cared
for by the team
so they can live out the rest of their
days
spending time with these beautiful
animals there is
no doubt how remarkable and or inspiring
they
are and i'm so pleased that places like
secret world wildlife rescue are here to
help them as
they really are so special
[Music]
you